---
published: true
layout: post
title: "8h/day? Awesome! Let's do it!"
permalink: 8h-per-day.html
date: 2016-01-23T02:00:00.000Z
---

It's Friday 10:30 PM and I just finished the working day. It's also a special day: I just closed all tickets assigned to me in our team's Redmine and it made me very happy and even more excited to keep contributing to the project! But after checking my time report one thing caught my attention: there's only ~7h recorded on it. :(

My contract says that I need to work 8h/day, a total of 40h/week. Currently I'm doing my best to be able to make at least 30h/week but I must confess that even this is hard to accomplish when you're logging only productive hours! So I dedided to ask some friends (about 5~7 hackers) how much time they are able to work productively per day. Guess what: none of them can sustain 8h/day working as software developers, engineers and/or architects!

Well, some of them answered that *sometimes* they make 8h or even more per day, but it's very rare.

As you may know, I'm currently working as software engineer for Rockstar Coders. It's a remote position, so I work from home, on my comfortable office chair, with [my coffee mug](https://www.instagram.com/p/BAkU0oDETDm/) and being able to take a shower whenever I wish. No time lost in traffic nor traffic headaches, etc. So why am I still not able to log these fucking 8h/day? Am I a stupid Brazilian who doesn't like hard work?

**Definitely not!**

The problem is the current conception of productivity. It's currently associated to the amount of time you work per day. I did a quick googling to check the origins of the 8h journey and [I found in Wikipedia that it's actually an achievement from 1866!](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eight-hour_day) Wow! I can't even imagine how software engineers could be productive while coding for 10~12h/day before that!

Today I'm not tired after working for ~7h, but generally after that I'm so tired that I can't even keep the logical thinking required to be able to, you know, get through the development loop: read a ticket description, understand the context, check the commit history, get some understanding of the architecture used in the module/component/class/function/whatever (if you're not the author of the code, obviously), and then only after that, being able to write or change some lines of code that solves the issue and allows you to start the loop again with the next ticket. So why am I so unproductive? Well, after stopping to think about that for a sec, I had some insights about the problem.

First of all, I don't get so tired when I'm engineering a module, a software feature or even a whole software stack. I only get really tired when I'm bugfixing! So that's the first insight: **the more fun you're having with the current ticket, the less you get tired - and vice-versa.**
